21st Annual Convention and Scientific Conference
Theme: The Future of Local veterinary Service: Innovations and Solutions

PVMA Backs Ground-Level Animal Health Champions at 21st PCMVLP Congress
The Philippine Veterinary Medical Association (PVMA), under the leadership of President Dr. Jerry V. Alcantara, reaffirmed its strong commitment to empowering local government veterinarians during the 21st Congress of the Provincial, City and Municipal Veterinarians League of the Philippines (PCMVLP), held on May 21-23, 2025 at the Subic Bay Travelers Hotel, Zambales.
The congress, with the theme “The Future of Local Veterinary Service: Finding Innovations and Solutions,” marked a historic milestone by gathering 174 attendees, the highest number in its history. Spearheaded by PCMVLP President Dr. Melanie Pescadilla and Vice President and Convention Chair Dr. Paul Foronda, the event became a dynamic platform for collaboration, knowledge exchange, and progressive dialogue among veterinary leaders from provinces, cities and municipalities across the country.
In his keynote address, Dr. Tomas Acorda of the Professional Regulation Commission’s Board of Veterinary Medicine inspired delegates with his vision to prevail over the challenges of scarce veterinary workforce and political challenges  to address emerging and re-emerging diseases. He emphasized the critical role of LGU veterinarians as frontline defenders of animal health and welfare, especially in rural and underserved communities.
Asst. Secretary of the Department of Agriculture, Dr. Benjamin Albarece, also shared insights during one of the plenary sessions, aligning national efforts with local initiatives on ruminant production. Meanwhile, Dr. Pescadilla emphasized the need to institutionalize support for veterinary professionals through the proposed Magna Carta for the Government Veterinary Workforce.
Key topics tackled throughout the multi-day congress included: ruminant production systems and sustainable livestock practices, Community animal biosecurity interventions, Global actions on antimicrobial resistance (AMR), veterinary workforce development challenges, African Swine Fever (ASF) vaccine and vaccination strategies, best management practices on Rabies control successes in Iloilo, Samal, and Valenzuela, and outbreak response models in Marinduque, Quezon, and Koronadal.  On the final day, a field session at Ocean Park Adventure focused on marine mammal disease emergencies, highlighting real-world protocols for medical response, transport, and handling.
The new set of PCMVLP Officers for 2025-2027 was proclaimed by Dr. Pastor C. Tumaliuan, Jr. The charging of new set of officers was facilitated by Dr. Pamela V. Hernandez, and the Oath of Office led by Dr. Jerry V. Alcantara.  Dr. Melanie F. Pescadilla transferred the leadership as she delivered her valedictory address, which was accepted by the new president Dr. Flomella A. Caguicla.  The other officers are Vice President: Dr. Janice D. Togonon, Secretary: Dr. May G. Magno, Treasurer: Dr. Erwin Roy L. Jalao, Auditor: Dr. Paul T. Foronda, P.R.O.: Dr. Josue M. Victoria, and Immediate Past President: Dr. Melanie F. Pescadilla.
Dr. Alcantara praised the event’s outcomes, noting that “LGU veterinarians are the forerunners of animal health at the grassroots level. The PVMA will continue to support their growth and innovation to ensure resilient and responsive veterinary services.”
The 21st PCMVLP Congress stands as a testament to the collective dedication of local veterinarians to evolve with the changing landscape of veterinary practice. Insights and resolutions from the congress are expected to guide future policy-making and capacity-building programs for more robust veterinary governance across the Philippines.